# Poetics

Earlier this semester, I wrote that my poetics are based on the human experience. They're based on emotions we experience every day; they're based on moments we go through by being human. But what defines these emotions, these moments?

My final project ties into this idea of questioning what defines these moments. It does so by changing the main thing we expect of famous historical romance stories (e.g. _Pride and Prejudice_): a heterosexual couple. What happens when we change the gender of the main love interest (e.g. Mr. Darcy)? Akin to _Sphinx_ by Anne Garreta, the love between the main characters should not change. And while the emotions of it do not, the realities of the love do shift since many of these books were written before the 20th century. There's an additional clandestine part to their love, being two people of the same gender.

This project also tackles gender norms of the time. By changing all characters' genders, this project comments on expected gender norms. Take the beginning line of _Pride and Prejudice_: "It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife." When we change everyone to female, for example, this changes to: "It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single woman in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife." It brings women into power in 19th century England while normalizing lesbian relationships in history.

This project thus comments on expectations on famous historical romance texts. In doing so, it comments on the human experience and how universal human emotions are, regardless of gender and sexual orientation.